Cellulitis

About cellulitis
Cellulitis is an infection of the deeper layers of skin and the underlying tissue. It can be serious if not treated promptly.
The infection develops suddenly and can spread through the body quickly. Severe infections can spread deep into the body, and can be life threatening.
Most cases are successfully treated with antibiotics at home, although sometimes it needs to be treated in hospital.
Symptoms of cellulitis
Cellulitis causes an area of skin to suddenly become:
red
hot
swollen
painful
tender
It most often affects the lower legs, but can occur anywhere.
Cellulitis causes swelling, redness, pain and tenderness in the affected area.
Source: https://dermnetnz.org/
In more severe cases, cellulitis can also be accompanied – and often preceded – by:
a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above
vigorous shaking (rigors)
nausea and vomiting
dizziness
confusion
These are signs that the infection has spread deeper into the body. Read more about the symptoms of cellulitis.
When to get professional advice
Non-urgent advice:
Speak to a pharmacist
Pharmacy First Scotland: Cellulitis treatment from your local pharmacy
Adults 18 years and over with symptoms of cellulitis can get advice and treatment directly from a pharmacy in certain instances. This includes cases where cellulitis is linked to an insect bites on the arms or body. If the pharmacist cannot treat you they may recommend you see your GP.
Find your local pharmacy on Scotland's Service directory.
See your pharmacist as soon as possible if an area of your skin suddenly turns red, painful and hot.
Early treatment can help reduce the risk of the infection becoming severe.
Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if:
your face or the area around your eye is affected
your symptoms are getting rapidly worse
you experience other symptoms in addition to the changes in your skin, such as a fever or vomiting
you have a weak immune system – for example, because of HIV or chemotherapy – or severe lymphoedema, a condition that causes swelling in the body's tissues
a young child or elderly person has possible cellulitis
Treatments for cellulitis
Cellulitis is usually treated with antibiotics. Many infections can be treated with antibiotic tablets at home.
You'll usually be given a five-day course of treatment, and your symptoms should start to improve after a few days.
Make sure you complete the whole course of medicine you've been given, even if you're feeling better. Contact your GP if your symptoms get worse after a few days or don't improve within a week.
For serious infections, treatment is usually started in hospital. You'll normally be given antibiotics directly into a vein through an injection or a drip.
Many hospitals can then arrange for this treatment to continue at home or in an outpatient clinic. Treatment is usually for five days.
If the infection responds to treatment quickly, it may be possible to complete the course with antibiotic tablets instead of having injections or a drip.
Read more about how cellulitis is treated.
Outlook for cellulitis
Cellulitis can usually be treated successfully with antibiotics, and most people make a full recovery.
But there is a risk it could cause potentially serious problems, particularly if it's not treated quickly, such as:
blood poisoning (sepsis) – where the bacteria enter the blood
kidney damage
leg ulcers
Septicaemia and kidney problems can be life threatening and require immediate treatment in hospital.
Causes of cellulitis
Cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection.
The bacteria that cause it often live harmlessly on the skin, but they can lead to an infection if they get into a break in your skin, such as:
a bruise, cut or graze 
an animal bite or insect bite
a leg ulcer
dry, cracked skin – for example, because of eczema or athlete's foot
In most cases the trigger for the infection is unknown.
The infection isn't normally spread from person to person.
Read about the causes of cellulitis, including information on who's most at risk of the condition.
Preventing cellulitis
If you've had cellulitis before, you're more likely to get it again.
It's not always possible to prevent it, but the following measures may help reduce your risk:
use moisturiser if your skin is dry or prone to cracking
lose weight if you're overweight – being obese can increase your risk of cellulitis
try to ensure any conditions that can increase your risk of cellulitis – such as eczema, athlete's foot, leg ulcers and lymphoedema – are well managed
make sure any cuts, grazes or bites are kept clean – wash them under running tap water and cover them with a plaster or dressing
wash your hands regularly – particularly when treating or touching a wound or skin condition
If you get cellulitis often or severely, your GP may refer you to a skin specialist called a dermatologist, or an infection specialist, to discuss the option of taking antibiotics on a long-term basis to protect against further infections.
Part 2
Symptoms of cellulitisSymptoms of cellulitis
Symptoms of cellulitis develop suddenly and can get worse quickly. It affects the skin and can also cause additional symptoms.
Skin symptoms
Cellulitis causes the affected skin to become:
red
hot
swollen
painful
tender
There may also be a break in the skin, although this isn't always obvious, and pus or blood-filled blisters.
Any part of the body can be affected.
Commonly affected areas include the lower legs, feet, arms or hands, and sometimes the face, particularly around the eyes.
See your GP or visit your nearest minor injuries unit as soon as possible if an area of your skin suddenly turns red, painful and hot.
The symptoms of cellulitis include redness, swelling and tenderness.
Source: https://dermnetnz.org/
Additional symptoms
Cellulitis can also cause additional symptoms that may develop before or alongside the changes to your skin.
These can include:
feeling generally unwell
feeling sick
shivering
chills
Occasionally the infection can spread to other parts of the body, such as the deeper layers of tissue, blood, muscle and bone. This can be very serious and potentially life threatening.
Signs the infection has spread include:
a high temperature (fever) of 38C (100.4F) or above
a fast heartbeat or fast breathing
being sick
diarrhoea
feeling dizzy or faint
confusion or disorientation
cold, clammy, pale skin
unresponsiveness or loss of consciousness
Call 999 or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if you have other symptoms in addition to changes to your skin.
Part 1
About cellulitis
Part 3
Causes of cellulitisCauses of cellulitis
Cellulitis is usually caused by a bacterial infection. It occurs when bacteria get into the tissues beneath the skin.
How the infection occurs
The bacteria that cause cellulitis often live harmlessly on the skin. But if the surface of your skin is damaged, they can get into the layers underneath and cause an infection.
The break in the skin may be so small it's not noticeable.
It may be caused by:
a cut or graze 
a burn
an animal or human bite
an insect bite
a puncture wound
a leg ulcer 
the skin becoming dry and cracked – for example, because of eczema or athlete's foot
Cellulitis isn't normally spread from person to person as the infection occurs deep within the skin and is often caused by bacteria that live on the skin's surface without causing problems.
Increased risk
Anyone can get cellulitis, but you're at an increased risk if:
you're obese 
you have poor circulation in your arms, legs, hands or feet
you have a weakened immune system – for example, because of HIV or chemotherapy treatment
you have lymphoedema – a condition that causes fluid to build up under your skin
you have poorly controlled diabetes
you've had cellulitis before
you use injected drugs
Ensuring the underlying health conditions mentioned above are well controlled may help reduce your risk of getting cellulitis. 
Part 2
Symptoms of cellulitis
Part 4
Treating cellulitisTreating cellulitis
Cellulitis can often be treated at home with a course of antibiotics, although severe cases may need to be treated in hospital.
Treatment at home
Antibiotics
If you're treated at home, you'll usually be prescribed antibiotic tablets to take two to four times a day for a week.
A longer course may be needed if your symptoms don't improve after a week or you have an underlying condition that makes cellulitis more difficult to treat, such as lymphoedema.
Commonly prescribed antibiotics include flucloxacillin and clarithromycin. Possible side effects can include an upset stomach or diarrhoea.
Your symptoms may get worse in the first 48 hours after treatment starts, but should start to improve soon afterwards.
Make sure you complete the whole course of medicine you're given, even if you're feeling better.
Looking after yourself
While you're recovering at home, the following steps can help ease your symptoms and aid your recovery:
take paracetamol or ibuprofen for the pain
raise the affected body part to reduce swelling – for example, if your leg is affected, rest it on pillows or a chair when you're sitting or lying down
try to regularly move the joint near the affected body part, such as your wrist or ankle, to stop it getting stiff
drink plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration
if you usually wear compression stockings – for example, for lymphoedema – avoid these until you've recovered
When to get medical advice
Contact your GP as soon as possible if:
your symptoms get worse after 48 hours
your symptoms haven't improved after a week
you develop additional symptoms, such as a high temperature (fever) or vomiting
Treatment in hospital
If you need to be admitted to hospital for treatment, you'll be given antibiotics directly into a vein through an injection or a drip (intravenous antibiotics).
Once you've recovered from the initial symptoms, you can usually be treated with antibiotic injections or tablets at home or as an outpatient, rather than staying in hospital.
Part 3
Causes of cellulitis
