Down's syndrome

Overview
A baby with Down's syndrome is born with more of chromosome 21 in some or all of their cells. It's also known as Trisomy 21.
People with Down’s syndrome may lead active, healthy and independent lives into their 60s, 70s and beyond.
Most will have mild to moderate learning disabilities and some may have more complex needs.
It cannot be known before birth if a person will need any additional help and support.
Some health conditions are more common in people with Down's syndrome but some are less common.
Part 2
Living with Down's syndromeLiving with Down's syndrome
There are increasing opportunities and support in education, work and housing for people with Down's syndrome.
Those with it can live healthy and fulfilling lives as part of their families and communities.
Some may:
live independently
have jobs
be in relationships
socialise with minimal support.
Evidence suggests most families of people with the condition feel satisfied with their lives.
Many children with Down's syndrome attend mainstream school and receive additional support if they need it.
Part 1
Overview
Part 3
Down's syndrome and healthDown's syndrome and health
Many children with Down's syndrome have similar health conditions to all children.
Some health conditions can be more common in people with Down’s syndrome, but some are less common.
Around 5 in 10 babies born with Down's syndrome will have heart issues, although fewer than 1 in 5 of those may need surgery.
They're more likely to have muscle tone and digestion issues and may have reduced hearing or vision.
However, they're less likely to develop some cancers and types of heart disease.
Regular health checks can make sure any health conditions are picked up early and managed.
Down's syndrome is not a life-limiting condition. People with the condition can lead active, healthy and fairly independent lives into their 60s, 70's and beyond.
Part 2
Living with Down's syndrome
Part 4
Screening for Down's syndromeScreening for Down's syndrome
During your pregnancy you'll be offered a test to detect if your baby might have Down’s syndrome.
All pregnant women, no matter what age, can be tested.
A blood test and nuchal translucency (NT) scan can be used to screen for this condition.
Part 3
Down's syndrome and health
Part 5
Further informationFurther information
You can get more information and support about Down's syndrome, as well as life with a child with the condition at Down's Syndrome Scotland
Part 4
Screening for Down's syndrome
