Fever in children

About fever in children
Urgent advice:
Contact your GP or, if your GP's closed, phone 111 for urgent advice if your child:
is under 3 months and has a temperature of 38°C (101°F) or above 
is over 3 months and has a temperature of 39°C (102°F) or above
has persistent vomiting
is refusing to feed
Always trust your instincts and phone 999 if you think there's an emergency. 
If your child seems to be otherwise well – for example, if they're playing and attentive – it's less likely they're seriously ill. 
As a parent it can be extremely worrying if your child has a high temperature. However, it's very common and often clears up by itself without treatment. 
A quick and easy way to find out whether your child has a fever is to take their temperature using a thermometer.
What causes a high temperature?
Most fevers are caused by infections or other illnesses. The high body temperature makes it more difficult for the bacteria and viruses that cause infections to survive.
Common conditions that can cause fevers include:
upper respiratory tract infections (RTIs)
flu
ear infections
roseola – a virus that causes a temperature and a rash 
tonsillitis
kidney or urinary tract infections (UTIs)
common childhood illnesses, such as chickenpox and whooping cough
Your child's temperature can also be raised after vaccinations, or if they overheat because of too much bedding or clothing.
Fever in babies and children under 2 years of age self-help guide
Complete this guide to assess fever symptoms in babies and children under 2 years of age. Find out if you should visit A&E, your GP, pharmacist or treat their condition at home.
Fever in babies
Before using this guide
If you're asking on behalf of a baby or child, please make sure they are:
conscious and alert
responding normally to you
If not, phone 999 and ask for an ambulance.
Start guide
Treating a fever
If your child has a fever, it's important to keep them hydrated by giving them plenty of cool water to drink.
Babies should be given plenty of liquids, such as breast milk or formula. Even if your child isn't thirsty, try to get them to drink little and often to keep their fluid levels up.
If the environment is warm, you could help to your child to stay at a comfortable temperature by covering them with a lightweight sheet or opening a window.
However, they should still be appropriately dressed for their surroundings and sponging your child with cool water isn't recommended to reduce a fever.
Antipyretics
Children's paracetamol or ibuprofen work as antipyretics, which help to reduce fever, as well as being painkillers. You can't give them both at the same time, but if one doesn't work, you may want to try the other later.
Antipyretics aren't always necessary. If your child isn't distressed by the fever or underlying illness, there's no need to use antipyretics to reduce a fever.
When using antipyretics, always read the patient information leaflet that comes with the medication to find the correct dose and frequency for your child's age.
More serious illnesses
Sometimes a high temperature in children is associated with more serious signs and symptoms, such as:
breathlessness
vomiting 
rash 
fits or seizures 
Possible serious bacterial illnesses include:
meningitis – infection of the meninges, the protective membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord
septicaemia – infection of the blood
pneumonia – inflammation of the lung tissue, usually caused by an infection
It's important to remember that potentially serious causes of fever are relatively rare.
