Measles

About measles
Measles is a highly infectious viral illness that can be very unpleasant and sometimes lead to serious complications. It's now uncommon in the UK because of the effectiveness of vaccination.
Anyone can get measles if they haven't been vaccinated or they haven't had it before, although it's most common in young children.
The infection usually clears in around 7 to 10 days.
Symptoms of measles
The initial symptoms of measles develop around 10 days after you're infected. These can include:
cold-like symptoms, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and a cough
sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light
a high temperature (fever), which may reach around 40C (104F)
small greyish-white spots on the inside of the cheeks
A few days later, a red-brown blotchy rash will appear. This usually starts on the head or upper neck, before spreading outwards to the rest of the body.
Read more about the symptoms of measles
Immediate action required:
Go to A&E or phone 999 if you or your child have measles and develop:
shortness of breath
coughing up blood
drowsiness
confusion
fits (convulsions)
Urgent advice:
Contact your GP or, if your GP's closed, phone 111 if:
you suspect you or your child might have measles 
you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you've not been fully vaccinated (had two doses of the MMR vaccine) or haven't had the infection before – even if you don't have any symptoms
If you're visiting your GP, it's best to phone before your visit as your GP surgery may need to make arrangements to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others.
You should also contact your GP if you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you've not been fully vaccinated (had two doses of the MMR vaccine) or haven't had the infection before – even if you don't have any symptoms.
Is measles serious?
Measles can be unpleasant, but will usually pass in about 7 to 10 days without causing any further problems.
Once you've had measles, your body builds up resistance (immunity) to the virus and it's highly unlikely you'll get it again.
However, measles can lead to serious and potentially life-threatening complications in some people. These include infections of the lungs (pneumonia) and brain (encephalitis).
Read more about the complications of measles
How measles is spread
The measles virus is contained in the millions of tiny droplets that come out of the nose and mouth when an infected person coughs or sneezes.
You can easily catch measles by breathing in these droplets or, if the droplets have settled on a surface, by touching the surface and then placing your hands near your nose or mouth. The virus can survive on surfaces for a few hours.
People with measles are infectious from when the symptoms develop until about four days after the rash first appears.
How measles can be prevented
Measles can be prevented by having the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine.
This is given in two doses as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme. The first dose is given when your child is around 12 months old and a second dose is given from age 3 years 4 months.
Adults and older children can be vaccinated at any age if they haven't been fully vaccinated before. Ask your GP about having the vaccination.
If the MMR vaccine isn't suitable for you, a treatment called human normal immunoglobulin (HNIG) can be used if you're at immediate risk of catching measles.
Read more about preventing measles
Treating measles
There are several things you can do to help relieve your symptoms and reduce the risk of spreading the infection, including:
taking paracetamol or ibuprofen to relieve fever, aches and pains – aspirin should not be given to children under 16 years old
drinking plenty of water to avoid dehydration
closing the curtains to help reduce light sensitivity
using damp cotton wool to clean the eyes
staying off school or work for at least four days from when the rash first appears
In severe cases, especially if there are complications, you or your child may need to be admitted to hospital for treatment.
Read more about treating measles
Part 2
Symptoms of measlesSymptoms of measles
Measles starts with cold-like symptoms that develop about 10 days after becoming infected. This is followed a few days later by the measles rash.
For most people, the illness lasts around 7 to 10 days in total.
Initial symptoms
The initial symptoms of measles can include:
a runny or blocked nose
sneezing
watery eyes
swollen eyelids
sore, red eyes that may be sensitive to light
a high temperature (fever), which may reach around 40C (104F)
small greyish-white spots in the mouth (see below)
aches and pains
a cough
loss of appetite
tiredness, irritability and a general lack of energy
Spots in the mouth
A day or two before the rash appears, many people with measles develop small greyish-white spots in their mouth.
Not everyone with measles has these spots, but if someone has them in addition to the other symptoms listed above or a rash, it's highly likely they have the condition.
The spots will usually last for a few days.
The measles rash
The measles rash appears around two to four days after the initial symptoms and normally fades after about a week.
You'll usually feel most ill on the first or second day after the rash develops.
The rash:
is made up of small red-brown, flat or slightly raised spots that may join together into larger blotchy patches
usually first appears on the head or neck, before spreading outwards to the rest of the body
is slightly itchy for some people
can look similar to other childhood conditions, such as slapped cheek syndrome, roseola or rubella
is unlikely to be caused by measles if the person has been fully vaccinated (had two doses of the MMR vaccine) or had measles before
When to seek medical advice
Contact your GP as soon as possible if you suspect that you or your child has measles, even if you're not completely sure.
It's best to phone before your visit, as your GP surgery may need to make arrangements to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others.
You should also see your GP if you've been in close contact with someone who has measles and you've not been fully vaccinated or haven't had the infection before – even if you don't have any symptoms yet.
Part 1
About measles
Part 3
Treating measlesTreating measles
There's no specific treatment for measles, but the condition usually improves within 7 to 10 days. Your GP will probably suggest taking things easy at home until you're feeling better.
Stay away from work or school for at least four days from when the measles rash first appears to reduce the risk of spreading the infection.
You should also try to avoid contact with people who are more vulnerable to the infection, such as young children and pregnant women.
Relieving symptoms
If the symptoms of measles are causing discomfort for you or your child, there are some things you can do to treat these while you wait for your body to fight off the virus.
Controlling fever and relieving pain
Paracetamol or ibuprofen can be used to reduce a high temperature (fever) and relieve any aches or pains if your child is uncomfortable.
Liquid infant paracetamol can be used for young children. Aspirin should not be given to children under 16 years old.
Speak to your pharmacist if you're not sure which medications are suitable for your child.
Drink plenty of fluids
If your child has a high temperature, make sure they drink plenty of fluids as they may be at risk of dehydration.
Keeping hydrated may also help reduce throat discomfort caused by coughing.
Treating sore eyes
You can gently clean away any crustiness from your child's eyelids and lashes using cotton wool soaked in water.
Closing curtains or dimming lights can help if bright light is hurting their eyes.
Treating cold-like symptoms
If your child has cold-like symptoms, such as a runny nose or a cough, there are a number of things you can do to help them feel more comfortable.
For example, it might help your child if they sit in a hot, steamy bathroom. Or you could put a wet towel on a warm radiator to moisten the air, which may help ease your child's cough.
Drinking warm drinks, particularly ones containing lemon or honey, may also help to relax the airways, loosen mucus, and soothe a cough. Honey should not be given to babies under 12 months.
Spotting signs of serious illness
If you or your child has measles, you should keep an eye out for any signs of the serious complications that can sometimes develop.
Signs of a more serious problem include:
shortness of breath
a sharp chest pain that feels worse with breathing
coughing up blood
drowsiness
confusion
fits (convulsions)
Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance if you or your child develop any of these symptoms.
Read more about the complications of measles
Part 2
Symptoms of measles
Part 4
Complications of measlesComplications of measles
Most people will recover from measles after around 7 to 10 days, but sometimes it can lead to serious complications.
It's estimated around 1 in every 5,000 people with measles will die as a result of the infection.
Who's most at risk?
Complications of measles are more likely to develop in certain groups of people, including:
babies younger than 12 months old
people with a weakened immune system - such as those with leukaemia, receiving cancer treatment or taking certain medication
pregnant women
Children who are older than 12 months and otherwise healthy have the lowest risk of developing complications.
Common complications
More common complications of measles include:
diarrhoea and vomiting, which can lead to dehydration
middle ear infection (otitis media), which can cause earache
eye infection (conjunctivitis)
inflammation of the voice box (laryngitis)
pneumonia, bronchitis and croup – infections of the airways and lungs
fits caused by a fever (febrile seizures)
About 1 in every 15 children with measles will develop complications like these.
Uncommon complications
Less common complications of measles include:
liver infection (hepatitis)
misalignment of the eyes (squint) – if the virus affects the nerves and muscles of the eye
infection of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) or infection of the brain itself (encephalitis)
Rare complications
In rare cases, measles can lead to:
serious eye disorders, such as an infection of the optic nerve, the nerve that transmits information from the eye to the brain – this is known as optic neuritis and can lead to vision loss 
heart and nervous system problems
a fatal brain complication known as subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), which can occur several years after measles – this is very rare, occurring in only 1 in every 25,000 cases
Pregnancy complications
If you're not immune to measles and you become infected while you're pregnant, there's a risk of:
miscarriage or stillbirth
your baby being born prematurely – before the 37th week of pregnancy
your baby having a low birth weight
If you're pregnant and you think you've come into contact with someone with measles and you know you're not immune, you should see your GP as soon as possible. They can advise you about treatment to reduce your risk of developing the condition.
Read more about preventing measles.
When to seek immediate medical advice
Go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance if you or your child have measles and develop:
shortness of breath
a sharp chest pain that feels worse with breathing
coughing up blood
drowsiness
confusion
fits (convulsions)
These symptoms:
might be a sign of a serious infection requiring admission to hospital
could be viral (pneumonitis for example), rather than bacterial in origin
Part 3
Treating measles
Part 5
Preventing measlesPreventing measles
You can avoid catching measles by having the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine.
If the MMR vaccine isn't suitable for you, a treatment called human normal immunoglobulin (HNIG) can be used if you're at immediate risk of catching measles.
MMR vaccine
Routine vaccination
The MMR vaccine is given as part of the routine NHS childhood vaccination programme. One dose is usually given to a child when they're 12 to 13 months old, and a second dose is given from age 3 years 4 months.
Contact your GP if you are uncertain about whether your child's vaccinations are up-to-date.
You or your child can be vaccinated at any point if you haven't been fully vaccinated before. If you're not sure whether you were vaccinated in the past, having the vaccine again won't cause any harm.
Special circumstances
A dose of the MMR vaccine can also be given to anyone over six months of age if they're at an immediate risk of catching measles. For example, this could be if:
there's an outbreak of measles in your local area
you've been in close contact with someone who has measles
you're planning on travelling to an area where the infection is widespread
Children who have the vaccine before their first birthday should still have the 2 routine doses at age 12 months and from age 3 years 4 months.
Human normal immunoglobulin
Human normal immunoglobulin (HNIG) is a special concentration of antibodies that can give short-term but immediate protection against measles.
It may be recommended for people in the following groups if they've been exposed to someone with measles:
all babies under 6 months of age, and some babies aged 6 to 8 months
pregnant women who haven't been fully vaccinated or haven't had measles before
people with weak immune systems – for example, those with HIV or people receiving treatment that weakens their immune system, such as treatment for leukaemia
HNIG should ideally be given within six days of exposure.
Stopping measles spreading to others
If you already have measles, it's important to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to other people.
You should:
avoid work or school for at least four days from when you first developed the measles rash
try to avoid contact with people who are more vulnerable to the infection, such as young children and pregnant women, while you're ill
Part 4
Complications of measles
