Meningitis

About meningitis
Meningitis is an infection of the protective membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meninges).
It can affect anyone, but is most common in babies, young children, teenagers and young adults.
Meningitis can be very serious if not treated quickly. It can cause life-threatening blood poisoning (septicaemia) and result in permanent damage to the brain or nerves.
A number of vaccinations are available that offer some protection against meningitis.
Symptoms of meningitis
Symptoms of meningitis develop suddenly and can include:
a high temperature (fever) over 37.5C (99.5F)
being sick
a headache
a blotchy rash that doesn't fade when a glass is rolled over it (this won't always develop)
a stiff neck
a dislike of bright lights
drowsiness or unresponsiveness
seizures (fits)
These symptoms can appear in any order and some may not appear.
Read more about the symptoms of meningitis
When to get medical help
You should get medical advice as soon as possible if you're concerned that you or your child could have meningitis.
Trust your instincts and don't wait until a rash develops.
Call 999 for an ambulance or go to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department immediately if you think you or your child might be seriously ill.
Call the 111 service or your GP surgery for advice if you're not sure if it's anything serious or you think you may have been exposed to someone with meningitis.
How meningitis is spread
Meningitis is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection. Bacterial meningitis is rarer but more serious than viral meningitis.
Infections that cause meningitis can be spread through:
sneezing
coughing
kissing
sharing utensils, cutlery and toothbrushes
Meningitis is usually caught from people who carry these viruses or bacteria in their nose or throat but aren't ill themselves.
It can also be caught from someone with meningitis, but this is less common.
Read more about the causes of meningitis
Vaccinations against meningitis
Vaccinations offer some protection against certain causes of meningitis.
These include the:
meningitis B vaccine – offered to babies aged 8 weeks, followed by a second dose at 16 weeks, and a booster at 1 year
6-in-1 vaccine – offered to babies at 8, 12 and 16 weeks of age
pneumococcal vaccine – offered to babies at 12 weeks and between 12 and 13 months old
meningitis C vaccine – offered at 12 weeks of age, 1 year
MMR vaccine – offered to babies at 1 year and a second dose at 3 years and 4 months
meningitis ACWY vaccine – offered to teenagers who are in S3 (around 14 years of age) at school. Young people who are in S4-S6 and missed the opportunity to get immunised last year, may also get the vaccine at school this year
Read more about the meningitis vaccinations
Treatments for meningitis
People with suspected meningitis will usually have tests in hospital to confirm the diagnosis and check whether the condition is the result of a viral or bacterial infection.
Bacterial meningitis usually needs to be treated in hospital for at least a week. Treatments include:
antibiotics given directly into a vein
fluids given directly into a vein
oxygen through a face mask
Viral meningitis tends to get better on its own within 7 to 10 days and can often be treated at home. Getting plenty of rest and taking painkillers and anti-sickness medication can help relieve the symptoms in the meantime.
Read more about how meningitis is treated
Outlook for meningitis
Viral meningitis will usually get better on its own and rarely causes any long-term problems.
Most people with bacterial meningitis who are treated quickly will also make a full recovery, although some are left with serious, long-term problems. These can include:
hearing loss or vision loss, which may be partial or total
problems with memory and concentration
recurrent seizures (epilepsy)
co-ordination, movement and balance problems
loss of limbs – amputation of affected limbs is sometimes necessary
Overall, it's estimated that up to 1 in every 10 cases of bacterial meningitis is fatal.
Read more about the complications of meningitis
Part 2
Causes of meningitisCauses of meningitis
Meningitis is usually caused by a viral or bacterial infection.
Viral meningitis is the most common and least serious type. Bacterial meningitis is rare but can be very serious if not treated.
Several different viruses and bacteria can cause meningitis, including:
meningococcal bacteria – there are several different types, called A, B, C, W, X, Y and Z
pneumococcal bacteria
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) bacteria
enteroviruses – viruses that usually only cause a mild stomach infection
the mumps virus
the herpes simplex virus – a virus that usually causes cold sores or genital herpes
A number of meningitis vaccinations provide protection against many of the infections that can cause meningitis.
How meningitis is spread
The viruses and bacteria that cause meningitis can be spread through:
sneezing
coughing 
kissing
sharing utensils, cutlery and toothbrushes
The infection is usually spread by people who carry these viruses or bacteria in their nose or throat, but aren't ill themselves.
The infection can also be spread by someone with meningitis, although this is less common.
It is possible to get meningitis more than once.
Who's most at risk?
Anyone can potentially get meningitis, but it's more common in:
babies and young children
teenagers and young adults
elderly people
people with a weak immune system – for example, those with HIV and those having chemotherapy
You can reduce the risk of getting meningitis by ensuring all your vaccinations are up-to-date.
Read more about meningitis vaccinations
Part 1
About meningitis
Part 3
Treating meningitisTreating meningitis
People with suspected meningitis will usually need to have tests in hospital and may need to stay in hospital for treatment.
Tests in hospital
Several tests may be carried out to confirm the diagnosis and check whether the condition is the result of a viral or bacterial infection.
These tests may include:
a physical examination to look for symptoms of meningitis
a blood test to check for bacteria or viruses
a lumbar puncture – where a sample of fluid is taken from the spine and checked for bacteria or viruses
a computerised tomography (CT) scan to check for any problems with the brain, such as swelling
As bacterial meningitis can be very serious, treatment with antibiotics will usually start before the diagnosis is confirmed and will be stopped later on if tests show the condition is being caused by a virus.
Treatment in hospital
Treatment in hospital is recommended in all cases of bacterial meningitis, as the condition can cause serious problems and requires close monitoring.
Severe viral meningitis may also be treated in hospital.
Treatments include:
antibiotics given directly into a vein
fluids given directly into a vein to prevent dehydration
oxygen through a face mask if there are any breathing difficulties
steroid medication to help reduce any swelling around the brain, in some cases
People with meningitis may need to stay in hospital for a few days, and in certain cases, treatment may be needed for several weeks.
Even after going home, it may be a while before you feel completely back to normal.
Additional treatment and long-term support may also be required if any complications of meningitis occur, such as hearing loss.
Treatment at home
You'll usually be able to go home from hospital if you or your child has mild meningitis and tests show it's being caused by a viral infection.
This type of meningitis will normally get better on its own without causing any serious problems. Most people feel better within 7-10 days.
In the meantime, it can help to:
get plenty of rest
take painkillers for a headache or general aches
take anti-emetic (anti-sickness) medicine for any vomiting
Preventing the spread of infection
The risk of someone with meningitis spreading the infection to others is generally low. But if someone is thought to be at high risk of infection, they may be given a dose of antibiotics as a precautionary measure.
This may include anyone who has been in prolonged close contact with someone who developed meningitis, such as:
people living in the same house
pupils sharing a dormitory
a boyfriend or girlfriend
People who have only had brief contact with someone who developed meningitis won't usually need to take antibiotics.
Part 2
Causes of meningitis
Part 4
Complications of meningitisComplications of meningitis
Most people make a full recovery from meningitis, but it can sometimes cause serious, long-term problems and can be life threatening.
This is why it's so important to get medical help as soon as possible if you think you or your child has symptoms of meningitis, and why meningitis vaccinations are offered to certain groups.
It's estimated up to one person in every two or three who survives bacterial meningitis is left with one or more permanent problems.
Complications are much rarer after viral meningitis.
Main complications
Some of the most common complications associated with meningitis are:
hearing loss, which may be partial or total – people who have had meningitis will usually have a hearing test after a few weeks to check for any problems
recurrent seizures (epilepsy)
problems with memory and concentration
co-ordination, movement and balance problems
learning difficulties and behavioural problems
vision loss, which may be partial or total
loss of limbs – amputation is sometimes necessary to stop the infection spreading through the body and remove damaged tissue
bone and joint problems, such as arthritis
kidney problems
Overall, it's estimated up to 1 in every 10 cases of bacterial meningitis is fatal.
Treatment and support
Additional treatment and long-term support may be required if you or your child experience complications of meningitis.
For example:
cochlear implants, which are small devices that are inserted into the ears to improve hearing, may be needed in cases of severe hearing loss – read more about treatment for hearing loss
prosthetic limbs and rehabilitation support may help if it was necessary to amputate any limbs – read more about recovering after an amputation
counselling and psychological support may help if the trauma of having meningitis causes problems such as disturbed sleep, bedwetting, or fear of doctors and hospitals
You may also find it useful to get in touch with organisations such as the Meningitis Research Foundation or Meningitis Now for support and advice about life after meningitis.
The Meningitis Research Foundation's guide to recovering from childhood bacterial meningitis and septicaemia (PDF, 6.73Mb) has more information about meningitis after effects and aftercare.
Part 3
Treating meningitis
Part 5
Preventing meningitisPreventing meningitis
Meningitis can be caused by a number of different infections, so several vaccinations offer some protection against it.
Children should receive most of these as part of the NHS vaccination schedule. Speak to your GP if you're not sure whether your or your child's vaccinations are up-to-date.
Meningitis B vaccine
The meningitis B vaccine offers protection against meningococcal group B bacteria, which are a common cause of meningitis in young children in the UK.
The vaccine is recommended for babies aged 8 weeks, followed by a second dose at 16 weeks, and a booster at one year.
6-in-1 vaccine
The 6-in-1 vaccine, also known as the DTaP/IPV/Hib/HepB vaccine, offers protection against diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, polio, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) and hepatitis B.
Hib are a type of bacteria that can cause meningitis.
The vaccine is given on three separate occasions when babies are 8, 12 and 16 weeks old.
More about the 6-in-1 vaccine
Pneumococcal vaccine
The pneumococcal vaccine offers protection against serious infections caused by pneumococcal bacteria, including meningitis.
Babies receive the pneumococcal vaccine as two separate injections, at 12 weeks and between 12 and 13 months old.
More about the pneumococcal vaccine
Hib/Men C vaccine
The meningitis C vaccine offers protection against a type of bacteria - meningococcal group C bacteria - that can cause meningitis.
Babies are offered a combined Hib/Men C vaccine at one year of age.
Teenagers and first-time university students are also offered vaccination against meningococcal group C bacteria as part of the combined meningitis ACWY vaccine (see below).
More about the Hib/Men C vaccine
MMR vaccine
The MMR vaccine offers protection against measles, mumps and rubella. Meningitis can sometimes occur as a complication of these infections.
The vaccine is usually given to babies at one year of age. They'll then have a second dose when they're three years and four months old.
More about the MMR vaccine
Meningitis ACWY vaccine
The meningitis ACWY vaccines offers protection against four types of bacteria that can cause meningitis – meningococcal groups A, C, W and Y.
Young people who are in S3 (around 14 years of age) at school are advised to have the vaccination. Young people who are in S4-S6 and missed the opportunity to get immunised last year, may also get the vaccine at school this year.
More about the meningitis ACWY vaccine
Part 4
Complications of meningitis
