Septic shock

About septic shock
Septic shock is a life-threatening condition that happens when your blood pressure drops to a dangerously low level after an infection.
Any type of bacteria can cause the infection. Fungi such as candida and viruses can also be a cause, although this is rare.
At first the infection can lead to a reaction called sepsis. This begins with weakness, chills, and a rapid heart and breathing rate.
Left untreated, toxins produced by bacteria can damage the small blood vessels, causing them to leak fluid into the surrounding tissues.
This can affect your heart's ability to pump blood to your organs, which lowers your blood pressure and means blood doesn't reach vital organs, such as the brain and liver.
People with a weakened immune system have an increased risk of developing septic shock.
This includes:
newborn babies
elderly people
pregnant women
people with long-term health conditions, such as diabetes, cirrhosis or kidney failure
people with lowered immune systems, such as those with HIV or AIDS or those receiving chemotherapy
Symptoms of septic shock
Symptoms of septic shock include:
low blood pressure (hypotension) that makes you feel dizzy when you stand up
a change in your mental state, such as confusion or disorientation
diarrhoea
nausea and vomiting
cold, clammy and pale skin
Septic shock is a medical emergency. Dial 999 to ask for an ambulance if you think that you or someone in your care has septic shock.
Treating septic shock
You'll usually be admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) so your body's functions and organs can be supported while the infection is treated. In some cases treatment may start in the emergency department.
Treatment may include:
oxygen therapy
fluids given directly through a vein (intravenously)
medication to increase your blood flow
antibiotics 
surgery (in some cases)
Read more about treating septic shock
Complications of septic shock
The chances of surviving septic shock will depend on:
the cause of infection
the number of organs that have failed
how soon treatment is started
Complications of septic shock can include:
inability of the lungs to take in enough oxygen (respiratory failure)
the heart not being able to pump enough blood around the body (heart failure)
kidney failure or injury 
abnormal blood clotting
These are serious health conditions that will need to be treated urgently. Septic shock can be fatal because of complications like these.
Part 2
Treating septic shockTreating septic shock
Sepsis and septic shock are medical emergencies and must be treated immediately.
It's likely you'll be admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) for urgent treatment and to carefully monitor your progress. In some cases treatment may begin in the emergency department.
Oxygen therapy
To help you breathe more easily, you'll be given oxygen through a face mask, a tube inserted into your nose, or an endotracheal tube inserted into your mouth. If you have severe shortness of breath, a mechanical ventilator may be used.
Increasing blood flow
You'll probably be given fluids directly into a vein. This will help raise your blood pressure by increasing the amount of fluid in your blood.
To increase the blood flow to your vital organs, such as your brain, liver, kidneys and heart, you may be prescribed inotropic medicines or vasopressors.
Inotropic medicines 
Inotropic medicines (inotropes), such as dobutamine, stimulate your heart. They increase the strength of your heartbeat, which helps get oxygen-rich blood to your tissues and organs, where it's needed.
Vasopressors
Vasopressors include:
dopamine
adrenaline
noradrenaline
These medicines will cause your blood vessels to narrow, increasing your blood pressure and the flow of blood around your body. This will allow your vital organs to start functioning properly.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are often used to treat the associated bacterial infection. The type of antibiotic used depends on the type of bacterial infection and where in the body the infection started.
You may be started on antibiotics immediately to increase your chances of survival. Initially, two or three types of antibiotics may be used. The most effective type of antibiotic can be used once the bacterium responsible for the infection is identified.
Surgery
In severe cases of sepsis or septic shock, the large decrease in blood pressure and blood flow can kill organ tissue. If this happens, surgery may be required to remove the dead tissue.
Part 1
About septic shock
